## Development Team Structure Variability

Continuing considerations of [variability in software development](https://www.matthewyancer.com/2023/10/16/development-lifecycle-variability.html), there are many ways to structure a development team. Again, there is no one-size-fits-all approach. The constraints of the project and the expertise of the individuals involved should be considered.

Steve McConnell's book [*Rapid Development*](https://www.amazon.com/Rapid-Development-Taming-Software-Schedules/dp/1556159005/) identifies several types of development team structures:

- **Business Team**: A typical hierarchical structure consisting of a peer group headed by a technical lead. The lead is usually chosen based on technical expertise, not management capability. The technical lead has final say on tough technical issues. Management typically interacts with the team through the technical lead. This team structure works well with small groups and is generally adaptable, but other team structures can outperform it.

- **Chief-Programmer Team**: Also referred to in Fred Brooks' [*The Mythical Man-Month*](https://www.matthewyancer.com/2023/10/07/the-mythical-man-month.html) as a "Surgical Team". This team structure takes advantage of some developers being 10x more productive than others. Rather than placing all developers on equal footing, the high-productivity developer is identified as the *surgeon* or *chief programmer*. They produce the majority of the design and the core production code. Other developers on the team fulfill supporting roles to keep the chief programmer as productive and unblocked as possible. This team structure can produce very fast results, especially over short periods of time.

- **Skunkworks Team**: Put a team of talented and creative developers in a facility where they are freed from the organization's normal day-to-day concerns and bureaucratic restrictions and turn them loose to self-organize and innovate. Management is unaware of the details of what the team is doing or how they are doing it--just that progress is being made. This team structure trades visibility for a huge surge in motivation and ownership.

- **Feature Team**: Resources are organized into hierarchical groups based on their disciplines, development, quality assurance, documentation, program management, marketing, etc. Then the product is divided into chunks and assigned teams to work on each area, made up of members from each of the disciplines. The teams are ultimately responsible for their area of the product. These teams are accountable and empowered. The team can consider viewpoints from all directions. This team structure allows for good problem-solving and creativity.

- **Search-and-Rescue Team**: The team acts like a group of emergency medical technicians who go looking for missing mountain climbers. Such a team needs specialized emergency medical training, mountaineering, and wilderness survival skills. It also needs to understand the terrain. In software, the team combines specialized knowledge of hardware and software tools with equally specialized knowledge of a particular business environment. The team needs to be able to respond immediately at any time of day and stabilize the system in the short term. This team structure excels at problem resolution.

- **SWAT Team**: The SWAT Team model is based on police SWAT teams. Each member is highly trained in a particular tool or practice, and they can work together as one seamless unit. SWAT team members may be specialized in a particular database system, programming environment, or a specific project phase such as estimation, planning, performance optimization, or recovery. Rather than looking for creativity, the team is used to solve tactical problems that are well suited to their area of expertise. The team trusts each other, and their focus allows them to quickly overcome problems. This team structure also works well on tactical execution projects.

- **Professional Athletic Team**: This team structure is modeled after a sports team, like a baseball team, for example. The manager is responsible for clearing roadblocks and allowing the team to work efficiently but doesn't directly contribute to the development, though they likely were a former star player. The developers are specialists hired for their expertise in a given area. They play their position and are not readily interchangeable with other positions. This allows for deep specialization. This team structure works best for projects that depend on the highly specialized roles that the players play.

- **Theater Team**: The central role on the project is the director, who maintains the vision of the product and assigns responsibilities. Individuals audition for and accept specific parts to play. Individuals can shape their parts of the project as their artistic instincts move them, but they can't clash with the director's vision. The software manager acts as the producer, ensuring funding, coordinating schedules, and making sure everyone is at the right place at the right time. This team structure provides a way to integrate strong individual contributions within a strong central vision for creative projects. It also works well for teams dominated by strong personalities.

- **Large Teams**: Large teams can suffer from communication and coordination problems. As the number of team members increases, the number of communication paths and the amount of coordination increases as well, but at a multiplicative rate. On a team of two programmers, there is one communication path. With three programmers, there are three communication paths. With four programmers, six communication paths. With five programmers, ten communication paths. With ten programmers, forty-five communication paths. With fifty programmers, 1200 communication paths. Large teams must use strategies to reduce communication paths. Create a hierarchy of smaller groups and appoint representatives from the groups to interact with each other and with management. The small groups can be business teams, chief-programmer teams, or feature teams. Appoint one person, such as an architect, surgeon, director, or program manager, who is in charge of the global solution and can ensure all of the local solutions add up to a good result.

Have you encountered any of these development team structures? Are there others that you've seen?
